No doubt every one of us
at one time or another
has faced a discouraging situation.
Really, no one is immune
from discouragement.
This feeling may last
for a day or two and then subside,
or it might last longer.
What can cause us to be discouraged?
The Watch Tower Publications Index
lists over 20 factors
that can contribute to discouragement.
Some of them are these:
another’s conduct
—what someone did or didn’t do
that disappointed us;
problems in our congregation;
feeling inadequate;
our own personal failures
—what we’ve done or failed to do;
health problems; and loss of privileges.
There are ever so many things
that can cause us to be downhearted.
Even the fact that we are discouraged
can be discouraging.
We feel guilty for being discouraged.
Here’s the good news.
We’re in good company.
Some very prominent
and faithful servants of Jehovah
mentioned in the Bible have been discouraged.
Moses became so discouraged
over the complaints of the Israelites
that he said to God:
“Please kill me right now.”
Rebekah was so distressed
because her son Esau married pagan women
that she told her husband, Isaac:
“I am disgusted with my life.”
Yes, family situations
can cause discouragement.
David was tormented by his sins.
At Psalm 51:3, he wrote:
“I am well-aware of my transgressions,
and my sin is always before me.”
Our mistakes can weigh us down.
Jeremiah felt so discouraged
by the opposition, ridicule,
and apathy he met up with
that he told himself:
“I am not going to make mention of [Jehovah],
and I will speak no more in his name.”
Yes, poor results in the ministry
can discourage us.
The apostle Paul frankly admitted
at Romans 7:24, 25
that he struggled against sinful tendencies.
At times,
he felt miserable over this conflict.
He said: “Miserable man that I am!
Who will rescue me
from the body undergoing this death?”
Faithful men and women
faced discouraging circumstances in the past,
and so do we.
Discouragement is a part of life
in this system.
We should expect it.
Yet, it’s important to consider
how we view discouragement.
Do we view ourselves
as helpless victims of discouragement
and let ourselves sink into a quagmire
of despair and self-pity,
or do we view discouragement
as an enemy
that we must fight against?
We easily recognize that feelings of pride,
selfishness, envy,
and such things are enemies.
We battle against these bad feelings.
We don’t want them to erode our faith
or gain a foothold in our personality.
Yet, sometimes we may yield all too willingly
to discouragement.
Why is this dangerous?
Please read with me Proverbs 24:10:
“If you become discouraged
“in the day of distress,
your strength will be meager.”
Did you note the reason why
we must fight discouragement?
What did Proverbs 24:10
tells us will happen
if we allow a “day of distress”
to discourage us?
We’ll lose our strength.
Yes, discouragement can drain us
of our spiritual, mental, emotional,
and even physical strength.
And what can happen if we lose our strength?
We can lose our enthusiasm for the truth.
We may lose interest in prayer
or in personal study.
We could slack off in attending meetings.
We could develop coldness
toward our brothers.
Our zeal for evangelizing can weaken.
We may even want to give up.
We don’t want any of those things
to happen to us, do we, brothers?
How, then, do we fight
and defeat discouragement?
Discouragement is a feeling, an emotion.
What causes feelings or emotions?
An article entitled “Negative Emotions
—Can You Overcome Them?”
was published
in the October 8, 1992, Awake!
This article didn’t discuss
serious cases of depression
that may have a medical or physical cause,
such as a disease,
a reaction to toxins, medications,
nutritional deficiencies,
allergens, hormonal problems,
or bipolar disorder.
Rather, it discussed how to overcome
moments of discouragement
like the temporary “day of distress”
mentioned at Proverbs 24:10.
Under the subheading
“We Can Control Our Thinking,”
it stated this:
“Many who work in the field of mental health
“maintain that our feelings
are caused by our thoughts.”
It’s been said
that ‘you cannot experience a feeling
without first experiencing a thought.’
So then, feeling discouraged
isn’t always the situation that we face
but the negative thoughts
that we have about the situation.
The first step, then,
in fighting discouragement
is to identify the negative thoughts.
Sometimes we say
that we have a “train of thought.”
It means we have a series of thoughts
that lead to a certain conclusion,
or destination, if you will.
Now, imagine yourself
getting on a literal railroad
or subway train.
Soon you realize
that you’re on the wrong train.
It’s taking you to a place
you do not want to go to.
What do you do?
Do you stay on the train
all the way to the wrong destination?
Of course not.
No, you get off that train
at the very next station.
But what do you do next?
You switch to the right train.
Now, figuratively speaking,
if you realize
that your mind is getting on
a train of negative thoughts
that are leading to discouragement,
can you get off that train?
Certainly.
But you need to switch
to the right train of thought
that will lead you
to a peaceful state of mind.
That’s the key.
We need to replace negative thoughts
with positive, upbuilding,
spiritual thoughts.
Keeping our thinking on the right track
is an ongoing process.
Notice how the apostle Paul put it
in Ephesians 4:23:
“And you should continue to be made new
in your dominant mental attitude.”
Do you see how Paul confirms
that we are in control?
We can change how we think.
And because we’re imperfect,
we have to make these changes continuously.
It’s not a losing battle.
Jehovah has given us powerful weapons
to help us make our minds
move in the right direction
—his powerful Word,
his mighty holy spirit,
the power of prayer,
and healthful spiritual food
from his organization.
Let’s consider some negative thoughts
that may lead to discouragement.
Then, we’ll consider
upbuilding, positive thoughts
that help us fight discouragement.
You had a bad day.
You said or did the wrong thing,
and you regret it.
It’s become a “day of distress.”
The thought enters your mind,
‘I’m worthless.’
That’s the “discouragement train.”
Will you continue to stay
on this train of thought,
taking you to the state of discouragement?
Remember, you have a choice.
You can reject it.
Instead of giving in
to that negative thought,
you could say to yourself:
‘Wait a minute. Stop!
‘That’s not right.
‘Just because I made a mistake
‘does not make me worthless
in Jehovah’s eyes.
‘He’s told us that he knows
that “we are dust”
‘and that he’s merciful.
‘And Jesus said that “not one sparrow
‘that has fallen to the ground
is forgotten by God,”
‘and that “[we] are worth more
than many sparrows.”
‘Yes, Jehovah views me as precious.
‘I’ll pray about this,
‘and I’m sure he’ll help me
not to make that mistake again.
‘Tomorrow will be a better day.
Thank you, Jehovah.’
Let’s take a second example.
A brother has said something
quite unkind to you.
This has become a “day of distress.”
The thought comes to your mind:
‘How can a brother behave like that
‘and still be in good standing?
‘He’s not a good example.
Why don’t the elders do something about it?’
Now, that’s discouragement speaking,
calling for us to “get on board.”
If we stay on that negative train of thought,
we could lose our spiritual strength.
But we still have a choice.
Will we replace those negative thoughts
with positive ones?
We could get our mind on a positive track
by saying to ourselves something like this:
‘Well, that was an unkind thing
for him to say.
‘This is not like him.
‘Maybe my brother just had a bad day.
‘He’s as imperfect as I am.
‘I’ve said unkind things too, at times,
‘and have regretted it.
‘He’s probably feeling the same way.
‘I remember Colossians 3:13 says
‘that we must “continue putting up
with one another
‘“and forgiving one another freely
‘“even if anyone has
a cause for complaint
‘against another.”
‘Well, he has given me a cause for complaint.
‘But it says Jehovah
has “freely [forgiven us].”
‘He has certainly forgiven me
countless times.
‘No, I am not going to allow this
‘to ruin our relationship.
‘How can I help my brother?
‘I’ll pray for him.
‘And I’ll pray for myself
‘that I don’t hold feelings of resentment
in my heart.’
Let’s consider a third example.
After years of hard work
at your place of employment,
your position has been terminated.
You’ve lost your job.
It’s a “day of distress.”
You’re filled
with anxious, negative thoughts:
‘How will I care for my family?
‘What will the future bring?
Why did Jehovah allow this to happen to me?’
Where will this train
of dark, negative thoughts lead you?
Certainly, discouragement will set in,
and you will become
spiritually weak and exhausted.
You still have a choice.
You can replace those negative thoughts
with thoughts such as these:
‘OK, I’ve lost my job.
‘What should I do?
‘Stop serving Jehovah?
‘No!
‘Jesus said that we should not be anxious
over material things
‘because Jehovah will provide
‘if we keep his Kingdom first in our lives.
‘He also said to keep our lives simple.
‘You know what?
‘There are things that we don’t need.
‘So that’s what we’ll do
‘—simplify our life
and do more in Jehovah’s service.
‘Jehovah promises never to abandon us.
‘I’ll throw my burden on him,
and I know he’ll help us
make the right decisions.’
Brothers, we’re living
in the last days of this system of things.
We’ll have our days of distress.
Sometimes these come
because of our own imperfection
or the imperfection of others.
But we also realize
that the Devil wants to discourage us.
Revelation 12:17 tells us
that Satan’s great anger is directed
toward those
“who observe the commandments of God
and have the work
of bearing witness concerning Jesus.”
The Devil will try to take advantage
of situations and problems that we face
to fill us with discouraging thoughts
and drain us of our strength.
Now we stand
at the very threshold of the new world.
Let’s fight discouragement
with all the weapons Jehovah gives us.
Continue to study God’s Word,
making it a part of your daily life.
Pray incessantly to Jehovah
for his powerful spirit.
Keep close to his organization.
God has promised to give us the victory.
Fearlessly, we join in repeating Paul’s words
at Philippians 4:13:
“For all things I have the strength
through the one who gives me power.”